latex input:	mmd-article-header
Title:	9p-based filesystems	
	Implementation Notes	
	v1.5
Author:	Maxim Kharchenko  
Date:	December 12, 2012  
Copyright:	2012, Cloudozer LLP. All Rights Reserved.
base header level:	2
latex mode:	memoir
latex input:	mmd-article-begin-doc
latex footer:	mmd-memoir-footer
css: mmd.css

# Background

## The protocol

'9p' is a family of protocols. Erlang on Xen uses two standard flavours of the
9p protocol: 9P2000 [#9p2000] and 9P2000.u [#9p2000u]. It also adds yet
another flavour --- 9P2000.e --- the Erlang extension of 9p2000 [#9p2000e].

## Evolution of the filesystem layer

The view of a filesystem in Erlang on Xen have gone through a few major
revisions. A brief overview of these revisions may help to understand the
rationale behind the current approach and its future directon.

When a Ling image gets compiled many named blobs of data are baked into it.
These blobs may contain Erlang code modules, a boot script, etc. The earliest
approach was to represent the blobs as 'files' all belonging to the same
'directory' called \_embed. A series of small changes throughout prim\_file,
erl\_prim\_loader, and other modules, overlayed \_embed over the 'true' filesystem
accessed via diod server. It was not possible to emulate directories of embedded
files or mount (multiple) subtrees from the diod server. Embedded files had no
file descriptors limiting their use to functions, such as file:read\_file().

The current approach to 9p-based filesystems in Erlang on Xen is more advanced.
The biggest enhancement is the introduction of the mounting server --- 9p\_mounter.
The mounting server made the filesystem interface flexible and uniform. It is
discussed extensively later. Another enhancement is introduction of 'synthetic'
files not mapped to named data blobs or Linux files. The [named data blobs]
interface was reworked.

The next (planned) stage of the evolution of 9p-based filesystems includes
addition of reestablishing transport connections, multi-mount policies,
incomplete operations, auhtentication/authorization. These changes are marked as
'NEW' throughout the document.

## Network filesystems and performance

In general, when performance and throughput is an issue, the filesystem
interface should be avoided. The primary intention of using and extending the
filesystem interface is compatibility with Erlang libraries, meeting
expectations of the current application code, gathering and distribution of 
configuration data. The current implementation of the code\_server module relies
heavily on the filesystem. The throughput is not usually an issue for code
loading. The initial code loading may affect the startup latency though. The
question is addressed by bypassing file operations in a custom version of
erl\_prim\_loader module, which is used by Erlang before the code\_server is
operational.

The filesystem interface may prove to be convenient for exposing configuration
information to other operating systems and tools. In a typical scenario, a bash
script may read status information of a certain application by mounting a
node filesystem and accessing the corresponding file. The rudimentary control
over entities of the application layers may be implemented by writes to
synthetic files.

The new clustering layer envisioned for Erlang on Xen relies heavily on the
functionality provided by the 9p layer described here.

## Notation and assumptions

Throughout the document 'fid' refers to a integer value returned by certain 9p
operations that identifies a name in the remote hierarchy -- a directory or a
file. 'cid' identifies a 9p connection. Composite fids introduced in the
document are sometimes referred to as 'cfids'.

# 9p server

Each Erlang on Xen node has a running local 9p server. The 9p server serves a series of
synthetic and/or not-so-synthetic files organized into a two-level hierarchy.
Explanations below assumes the following sample hierarchy:

	/
	/boot
	/boot/local.map
	/boot/start.boot
	/stdlib
	/stdlib/dict.ling
	/proc
	/proc/1
	/proc/2
	
The first level names (`/boot`, `/stdlib`, and `/proc`) are _always_
directories. Such directories are called 'export' directories. The second level
names, e.g. `/proc/1`, are _always_ files. Thus the root directory `/` cannot
contain files and export directories cannot contain other directories. These
limitations of the 9p server hierarchy are not carried over to applications
consuming the exported tree as the exported names can be mounted at arbitrary
locations.

## Callback module dissected

Each export directory is associated with a callback module. The 9p server
invokes the callback module when an operation is requested on the directory or
any file it contains. A single callback module may be responsible for multiple
directories. For example, both `/boot` and `/stdlib` are associated with
`embedded_export` module. Callbacks receive an additional parameter that allow
them to distinguish between directories in such cases.

9p server tries to collect and provide as much information as possible by itself
without asking the callback module. For example, all walk operations are mostly
handled by 9p server. The callback module may be asked to verify permissions.

Each callback module implements a predefined set of functions. If certain
function is not exported by the module, a default implementation is used
instead.

All calls receive Conn and ModConf parameters. Conn is an opaque structure that
can be queried using '9p\_info':\* calls. See [below][9p_info interface].
ModConf parameter contains the callback module configuration. It can be used to
distinguish between directories when the callback module serves several of them.

Names and aliases can be used interchangably. Passing an alias instead of a name
is often faster.

Predefined functions of an export module:

* top\_granted(User, Conn, ModConf) -&gt; true | false
* file\_granted(Name, User, Conn, ModConf) -&gt; true | false
* list\_dir(Conn, ModConf) -&gt; Files
* find(Name, Conn, ModConf) -&gt; {found,Alias} | false
* create(Name, Conn, ModConf) -&gt; true | false
* remove(Name, Conn, ModConf) -&gt; true | false
* rename(Name, Conn, ModConf) -&gt; true | false
* read(Name, Offset, Count, Conn, ModConf) -&gt; {cache,Data} | Data
* write(Name, Offset, Data, Conn, ModConf) -&gt; Count
* truncate(Name, Size, Conn, ModConf) -&gt; true
* top\_stat(Conn, ModConf) -&gt; #stat{}
* file\_stat(Name, Conn, ModConf) -&gt; #stat{}

Detailed description of predefined functions of a callback module follow.

	top_granted(User, Conn, ModConf) -> true | false

Authorizes attach/walk operation for the entire export directory. _User_ is a
user name or a `{UserName,UserId}` tuple taken from attach parameters. _User_ is
set to `undefined` for walk operations. Defaults to `true`.

	file_granted(Name, User, Conn, ModConf) -> true | false

Authorizes attach/walk operation for a named file in the exported directory.
_User_ is a user name or a `{UserName,UserId}` tuple taken from attach
parameters. _User_ is set to `undefined` for walk operations. Defaults to
`true`.

	list_dir(Conn, ModConf) -> Files

Returns the list of {Name,Alias} tuples for all files in the directory. Names
are represented as binaries. No default.

	find(Name, Conn, ModConf) -> {found,Alias} | false

Checks if the named file exists and returns its alias. The alias may be the same
as Name. No default.

	create(Name, Conn, ModConf) -> true | false

Creates the named file. Returns `true` if successful, and `false` otherwise.
Defaults to `false`.

	remove(Name, Conn, ModConf) -> true | false

Remove the named file. Returns `true` if successful. Defaults to `false`. Note
that it is not possible to `remove` the exported directory.

	rename(Name, NewName, Conn, ModConf) -> true | false

Renames the file to NewName. Returns `true` if successful. Defaults to `false`.

	read(Name, Offset, Count, Conn, ModConf) -> {cache,Data} | Data

Reads (maximum) _Count_ bytes from the named file starting at _Offset_ and
returns them as a binary. Note that the size of _Data_ may be less than _Count_.
Defaults to `<<>>`.

`{cache,Data}` return value contains the whole contents of the file. The caller
may save the value and serve this and any subsequent read requests by slicing
the cached value. If `Offset` is 0, then `read()` should be queried even if the
cached contents is available. This creates a chance for refreshing the cached
file contents. The cached data may be either a binary or a list of binaries. In
the latter case, when slicing the cached value the boundaries of binaries should
not be crossed. Such behaviour is needed for serving data represented as
records, for example, when reading directories.

	write(Name, Offset, Data, Conn, ModConf) -> Count

User, Write _Data_ to the named file starting at _Offset_. Returns number of bytes
actually written. Defaults to `0`.

	truncate(Name, Size, Conn, ModConf) -> true

Truncate the size of the named file to _Size_.

	top_stat(Name, Conn, ModConf) -> #stat{}

Fills in the stat structure with information about the export directory itself.
The only field that must be set is 'name'. No default. See file\_stat/3.

	file_stat(Name, Conn, ModConf) -> #stat{}

Fills in the stat structure with information about the file. Fields 'name' and
'legth' must be set. No default. The following properties are recognised:

* qid (a 13-byte binary that contains type, version and identity)
* mode
* atime (access time, Unix timestamp)
* mtime (modification time, Unix timestamp)
* length
* name

### 9p_info interface

Function | Returns
---------|--------
version(Conn) | negotiated version number, e.g. `<<"9P2000.e">>`
peer\_node(Conn) | node id of the peer node
peer\_group(Conn) | group id of the peer node
auth\_path(Conn) | aname passed with auth message
auth\_user(Conn) | uname passed with auth message
auth\_user\_id(Conn) | n\_uname passed with auth message (Unix clients only)
unix\_user(Conn) | user id (Unix clients only)
unix\_group(Conn) | group id (Unix clients only)

## Linux mounts possible

Linux clients are distinguished from Erlang clients by the version of the
protocol they request. For Unix client the expected protocol version is 9P2000.u
[#9p2000u]. Unix clients must authenticate themselves before attaching to the
exported tree. Such clients must use MUNGE authentication scheme [#munge].
User and group ids from the accepted MUNGE message are included into connection
parameters and can be retrieved using '9p\_info':unix\_user() and
'9p\_info':unix\_group() calls respectively.

Unfortunately, the standard kernel driver -- v9fs -- does not provide for MUNGE
authenication. There is a wrapper over the mount command that fixes this
[#eoxmount].

## Local connections auto-authenticated

9p server may listen on a loopback interface and accept connections from the
same node. Such connections are authenticated automatically. The auth message
should not be sent over a local connection and afid in attach requests should be
set to (~0). The connection data is automatically filled in with the local node
and group ids. Local connections are distinguished by calling
`TransMod:is_local(TransConf)`. See [9P transports].

## Basic authorization first

Authenticated Erlang clients must pass the basic authorization. The basic
authorization ensures the deliberate limitation imposed on internode
communications. The group of the connecting node must match the group of the
receiving node or the connecting node must be the parent of the receiving node.
Otherwise, the basic authorization fails.

Unix clients are not subject to the basic authorization.

Access rights are further checked on per-directory/per-file basis using
`top_granted()` and `file_granted()` callbacks.

## Sample session explained

	---> Tversion msize=4294967295 version="9P2000.e"
	<--- Rversion msize=4294967295 version="9P2000.e"

The connecting client is another node talking 9P2000.e --- an Erlang extension
of 9P2000 protocol [#9p2000e]. The higher clustering layer uses 9p protocol to
pass messages between processes of different nodes. The messages are not split
into parts. The clustering layer relies on the 9p message framing. Thus `msize`
must be set to the maximum possible value.

A Tsession message may follow if the client wishes to reconnect the session
after a lost transport connection. The subsequent commands will not appear for a
reestablished session.
	
	---> Tauth afid=0 aname="/" uname=""
	<--- Rauth aqid

`aname` and `uname` values are saved and callbacks may retrieve them. Skipped
for local connections.

	---> Twrite afid=0 offset=0 data=(MUMBLE message)
	<--- Rwrite count

A single MUMBLE message [#mumble] is written to afid authenticating the
connecting node. The message should use the textual format. The message
establishes node and group ids of the connecting node.

	---> Tattach afid=0 uname="" aname="/proc"
	<--- Rattach aqid

The connecting client attaches to `/proc` creating a starting point for
subsequent requests. `uname` value is ignored. Suppose, a module `proc_export` is
the callback module for the `/proc` directory. `proc_export:top_granted()` is
called to verify access rights. `proc_export:file_granted()` would be called if
`aname` is set to `/proc/1` or similar. More attach request may follow.

	---> Tclunk fid=0
	<--- Rclunk

Clunk the authentication fid.

## How to add an export?

When started the 9p server has nothing to serve. The filesystem information is
added to 9p server on a per-directory basis. The interface is following:

	'9p_server':add_export(Name, DirMod, ModConf)
	'9p_server':remove_export(Name)

The _Name_ is the name of the exported directory, e.g. <<"stdlib">>. The
_Module_ is the callback module for the directory. _ModConf_ will be passed 'as is'
to all _Module_:\* calls.

The initial configuration of the 9p server is stored in the /boot/app.conf file
as described in the section [Erlang on Xen boot sequence].

# 9p transports

Both 9p client and server should be able to use multiple protocols to transport
9p messages. The 9p infrastructure emphasizes flexibility over performance,
thus TCP/IP transport will suffice in most cases, especially, as public clouds
restrict other transports.

For starters, the 9p infrastructure will be limited to TCP/IP transport but
the transport is abstracted out to add other transports (SCTP) later. The
name of the module implementing the TCP/IP transport for 9p is '9p\_tcp'.

The type of the transport is determined by the name of the module that
implements it. The behaviour of the transport module is closely follows that of
gen\_tcp module.

	connect(TransConf) -> {ok,Sock} | {error,Error}
	connect(TransConf, Timeout) -> {ok,Sock} | {error,Error}
	send(Sock, Data, TransConf) -> ok | {error,Error}
	recv(Sock, TransConf) -> {ok,Packet} | {error,Error}
	recv(Sock, TransConf, Timeout) -> {ok,Packet} | {error,Error}
	set_maximum_size(Sock, MSize, TransConf) -> ok | {error,Error}
	activate(Sock, TransConf) -> ok | {error,Error}
	is_local(TransConf) -> true | false
	close(Sock, TransConf) -> ok | {error,Error}

[TODO: 'bypass' transport]

All entries of the transport module are self-explanatory.  The activate() call
switches the socket into active mode and it starts to deliver messages
asynchronously to the controlling process. The active mode is facilitated by the
non-standard {packet,'9p'} type that understands the framing of 9p packets. The
standard {packet,4} type cannot be used as the size of 9p messages includes the
size field itself. The size field is stripped off for '9p' packets.

The is\_local() function lets the [9p mounter] and [9p server] to distinguish
between local and remote connections.

The traffic encryption can be added by implementing a special transport module.

# 9p mounter

9p mounter maintains connections to 9p servers. Portions of name hierarchies
exported by the servers are mapped to _mounting points_ in the local hierarchy.
This information is kept in the mounting map. Several remote name can share a
local mounting point. Thus a local path may refer to multiple remote locations
accessible over several 9p connections. 

During the boot sequence, the flexible mounting hepls to recreate a directory
structure expected by the code\_server. Erlang on Xen mostly use standard
modules of Erlang/OTP with a few exceptions. For instance, an os module of the
kernel application is modified to be compatible with Erlang on Xen. The modified
version is injected into the hierarchy the flexible mounting. First
/usr/lib/erlang/lib directory of the Linux filesystem exported by diod server is
mounted at /erlang/lib. Then 9p mounter establishes a connection to the local
9p server and mounts its /kernel directory at /erlang/lib/kernel. Thus the
second mounting operation _shadows_ files with the same name mounted initially,
including /erlang/lib/kernel/os.ling. The code\_server searching for the code of
the os module finds the modified version.

9p mounter introduces a concept of composite fids. A scope of a single fid is
limited to cid -- a single 9p connection. A composite fid contains a list of (cid,fid)
pairs.

The mounting information is encapsulated by the '9p\_mounter' process. Each
connection is managed by a separate connection process. File operations, as
implemented by prim\_file module, inquire '9p\_mounter' process to retrieve Pids
of relevant connections. The '9p\_mounter' process acts as a supervisor for
connection processes.

In addition to maintaining the mounting information '9p\_mounter' process
responds to 9p requests that refer to the local portions of mounting points.

The primary functions provided by the 9p mounter are:

1. Open/close a 9p connection and add/remove associated mounts to/from the
mounting map.

1. Manage the current working directory.

1. Resolve local paths to composite fids.

1. Accept subscriptions/notify subscribers when a given local path
appears/vanishes due to new/lost/closed 9p connections.

## New 9p connections

The following two functions add and remove connections from the 9p mounter:

	add_connection(TransMod, TransConf, Mounts, Opts) -> {ok,ConnPid} | {error,Error}
	remove_connection(ConnPid) -> ok | {error,Error}

_Mounts_ is a list of pair that define the mapping between local and remote
paths. The the mapping paths can not have '..' (parent) element. For instance,

	Mounts = [
           {<<"/erlang/lib">>,<<"/">>},
           {<<"/amqp/q">>,<<"/queue">>}
         ].

_Opts_ is a list of options. The following options are supported:

	{version,Version}

The version of 9p2000 protocl to use. Possible versions are '9p2000.L' and
'9p2000.e', which is the default.

When a new connection is added to the 9p mounter, a series of steps happens in
sequence. Firstly, a transport link is established to the 9p server. Then a
version negotiation happens that insures that the server supports the required
version of the protocol. The maximum message size is negotiated too.
The server can not decrease the maximum size requested by the client. The
connection is dropped, if it attempts to.

After successful version negotiation, the 9p mounter performs authentication,
unless the connection is local. Then it attaches to all mounting points listed
the add\_connection() call. If some attach operations fail, then the
corresponding mapping is not added to the mounting map.

## Current working directory

The concept of the current working directory is a legacy and has a limited value
for Erlang on Xen. It is expected that the current directory will be set once
during the boot sequence.

	get_cwd() -> {ok,Cwd} | {error,Error}
	set_cwd(Path) -> ok | {error,Error}

## Local paths resolved

A central function of the 9p mounter is to come up with list list of connections
and associated fids that may serve a given local name.

	resolve_path(Path) -> 

...

TODO current directory?

For current directory we need to keep mostly path, such as /a/b/c. cfid for the
current directory may be kept as a cached value.

# 9p client

Each 9p connection is managed by a separate Erlang process. A 9p connection is
initiatied by calling:

	start_link(TransMod, TransConf, AttachTo) -> {ok,ConnPid}
	start_link(TransMod, TransConf, AttachTo, Opts) -> {ok,ConnPid}

`TransMod`/`TranConf` is the transport configuration. `AttachTo` is the list of
attach paths. Attach paths should be either a binary, a `{AName,User}` tuple or
`{AName,User,Uid}` tuple. The tuple format lets the caller specify the
parameters of the attach message.

The following optiions are recognized by '9p':start\_link():

	{version,Ver}
	{msize,N}
	{auth_user,AUser}
	{auth_user_id,AUserId}
	{auth_path,APath}
	{unix_uid,Uid}
	{unix_gid,Gid}

Possible versions are '9P2000.L' and '9P2000.e' (default). `msize` defaults to
4294967295 for '9P2000.e' version to allow sending processes messages as a
single 9p frame. AUser, AUserId, and APath are auxilliary parameters rof the 9p
auth message. Uid and Gid are passed on to the server if MUNGE authentication is
in effect.

Establishing a 9p connection involves many, sometimes a dozen roundtrips to the
server. The start\_link() calls only initiates the process. Completed attach
operations are communicated to the 9p mounter asynchronously using the following
messages:

	{'9p_attached',ConnPid,Fid,AName}

9p mounter translated these messages into the corresponding updates to the mounting
table.

A 9p connection should be started by the 9p mounter. Otherwise, the processe
opening a 9p connection should trap exits and send the message
`{'9p_closed',ConnPid}` to the 9p mounter when it detects a dropped 9p
connection.

A 9p connection should detect dropped/lost transport connections and attempt to
recover them using a session key (9P2000.e only).

# prim_file

TODO: union mount map/reduce strategies
TODO promises

A typical scenario implemented at prim\_file level involves issuing
attach/read/clunk requests to all fids referred by the file descriptor and
combining the results.

Composite fids make error handling more complex. An operation on a composite fid
may results in dozen of separate conversations over many connections. Some of
them may (and will) fail. Thus the result of the operation may be partial and
include errors. The file:\* interface does not provide a facility for
returning partial results. The practical approach is to return partial results as
a complete set. If there are no usable results at all, the last error should be
returned.


---

# Erlang on Xen boot sequence

Erlang on Xen uses the modified boot sequence of Erlang/OTP. 9p\_server and
9p\_mounter processes are added to the kernel supervision tree. 9p\_server
starts a listener on the loopback interface and export all buckets of named
blobs. 9p\_mounter obtains the initial mounting information from a file
/boot/local.map. The file is generated during the build process.

Early during the boot sequence the files are retrieved using a low-level named
blob interface. For example, the boot script is found using
`binary:lookup_embedded('boot.script')` call. Note that the call disregards the
bucket that contains the boot script.

Later a 9p server starts to accept local connections and the code server is able
to search for modules using `file:*` interface. The union mounting ability of
the 9p mounter allows 'shadowing' of standard Erlang modules with custom Erlang
on Xen versions.

All remote 9p connections are controlled by command-line arguments. They are
established later during the boot sequence just before applications are started.

# Authentication summary

All possible modes of authentication are summarized in the table below. _alpha_
and _beta_ are Erlang on Xen nodes, _diod_ is a Linux 9p server, _v9fs_ is a
Linux 9p kernel driver.

Connection | Protocol | Mode
-------|-------------|----------|-----
alpha &rarr; alpha | 9P2000.e | A local connection - no authentication
alpha &rarr; beta | 9P2000.e | MUMBLE authentication [#mumble]
alpha &rarr; diod | 9P2000.L | MUNGE authentication [#munge]
v9fs &rarr; alpha | 9P2000.u | MUNGE authentication

The v9fs ---> alpha is tricky. It uses a wrapper over the mount command tha
performs initial 9p message exchange, including MUNGE authentication, and then
pass the file descriptor to the mount command [#eoxmount].

# Related

## Named data blobs

All named blobs embedded into a Ling image are separated into 'buckets'. The
buckets contains data blobs, but not other buckets. The names of buckets and
data blobs are atoms.

The following BIFs expose buckets and data blobs to the application:

	binary:embedded_buckets() -> [atom()]

returns the list of all buckets.

	binary:list_embedded(Bucket) -> [atom()] | false

returns the list of data blobs that belong to the _Bucket_ or `false` if the
bucket is not found.

	binary:embedded_size(Bucket, Name) -> integer() | false

returns the size of the data blob identified by _Bucket/Name_ pair or `false` if
the data blob is not found.

	binary:embedded_part(Bucket, Name, Pos, Len) -> binary() | false
	binary:embedded_part(Bucket, Name, PosLen) -> binary() | false

returns _Len_ bytes of the data blob _Bucket/Name_ starting at the position
_Pos_. _Len_, _Pos_, and _PosLen_ follow the conventions of the 'binary' module.
`false` is returned if the blob is not found.

	binary:lookup_embedded(Name) -> Data | false

returns the contents of the named blob. The blob is search in all buckets. The
first blob found is returned. Returns `false` if the blob is not found.

The build system generates the list of buckets from the contents of the 'import'
directory. The directory contain soft links to other directories. The link names
become the bucket names and the contents of the referenced directories are
embedded as data blobs. .beam files are skipped if there exists a .ling file
with the same name.

The 9p server exports all buckets and their contents as synthetic files. The
corresponding behaviour is encapsulated in 'embedded\_exp' module.

[#9pintro]: Plan 9 Manual INTRO(5) (http://man.cat-v.org/plan_9/5/intro).

[#9p2000L]: 9p2000.L protocol (http://code.google.com/p/diod/wiki/protocol). 

[#9p2000u]: 9p2000 protocol Unix extension
(http://ericvh.github.com/9p-rfc/rfc9p2000.u.html).

[#9p2000e]: 9p2000.e protocol Erlang extension, Cloudozer LLP, 2012.

[#mumble]: MUMBLE authentication scheme, Cloudozer LLP, 2012.

[#munge]: MUNGE authentication scheme (https://code.google.com/p/munge/).

[#eoxmount]: Erlang on Xen mounting wrapper (http://github.com/maximk/eoxmount).

