latex input:	mmd-article-header
Title:	9P2000 Protocol Erlang Extention	
	v0.1
Author:	Maxim Kharchenko  
Date:	December 17, 2012  
Copyright:	2012, Cloudozer LLP. All Rights Reserved.
base header level:	2
latex mode:	memoir
latex input:	mmd-article-begin-doc
latex footer:	mmd-memoir-footer
css: mmd.css

# Notation

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", "OPTIONAL" in this document should be
interpreted as described in [#RFC2119].

# Introduction

Erlang on Xen makes extensive use of 9p protocol for a multitude of tasks,
including code loading, storage access, node monitoring, message passing, etc.
In most cases, the standard semantics of the protocol is enough. However, in a
few cases limitations of the protocol gets in the way.

Dropped transport connections
:	9p connections are tightly coupled to the underlying transport (TCP)
	connections. The loss of TCP connection --- a frequent occurence during
	instance migration --- means that all Fids are lost.

Simple operations too chatty
:	A simple operation, such as writing "0" to a synthetic file, require
	multiple network roundtrips: walk to file, open Fid, write data, clunk Fid.
	This makes many administrative tasks noticably slow.

The 9p protocol extension --- 9P2000.e --- is introduced to address these two
issues. Erlang on Xen use this protocol version for internode communications.

# Overview

9P2000.e is the extension of 9P2000 protocol [#9P2000]. It adds several new
protocol operations as described below. Semantics of standard protocol
operations are left unchanged.

A new operation --- session --- reestablishes a session upon after reconnecting
a transport. All Fids are preserved in the reestablished session.

Also the protocol extension adds a few new operations that act as
macro-operations of frequently used sequences.

The server that implements 9P2000.e should fall back gracefully to use 9P2000
protocol by disabling the newly introduced operations.

# New messages

	size[4] Tsession tag[2] key[8]
	size[4] Rsession tag[2] 

	size[4] Tsread tag[2] fid[4] nwname[2] nwname*(wname[s])
	size[4] Rsread tag[2] count[4] data[count]

	size[4] Tswrite tag[2] fid[4] nwname[2] nwname*(wname[s]) count[4] data[count]
	size[4] Rswrite tag[2] count[4]

The proposed numeric values for the new commands are as follows:

Value | Commmand
------|---------
150 | Tsession
151 | Rsession
152 | Tsread
153 | Rsread
154 | Tswrite
155 | Rswrite

# New operations

## session - reestablish a session

	size[4] Tsession tag[2] key[8]
	size[4] Rsession tag[2] 

When a client performs authentication it may establish a session key. If
transport connection is lost and reconnected the client may decide to use the
session message to request reestablishing of the session. A successful reply
means that the session is reestablished and all connection Fids are still valid.

An error reply means that the session can not be reestablished. The client may
decide to continue, treating the connection as completely new.

The session message must be the first message must be the first message that
follows a successful version negotiation. The tag of the session message must be
set to NOTAG (~0). A rerror message is returned if the session can not be
recovered.

9P2000.e protocol uses MUMBLE messages for authentication [#mumble]. A MUMBLE
message contains the session key for the new session.

## sread - read entire file contents

	size[4] Tsread tag[2] fid[4] nwname[2] nwname*(wname[s])
	size[4] Rsread tag[2] count[4] data[count]

The operation reads the entire contents of a file. A file is identifier by
walking to a series of wnames starting with fid. The operation combines walking
to a file, opening it, reading its content, and clunking a fid.  The new
operation minimizes network roundtrips when reading small files.

## swrite - overwrite file contents

	size[4] Tswrite tag[2] fid[4] nwname[2] nwname*(wname[s]) count[4] data[count]
	size[4] Rswrite tag[2] count[4]

The operation overwrites the file contents with data. The file is created if it
does not exist.

# Discussion

The session key should be kept secret as knowing it may allow hijacking of a 9p
connection.

The Erlang extension does not change the semantics of the standard 9P2000
operations. This should facilitate a graceful fallback to plain 9P2000 protocol
if the server does not support the extension.

[#RFC2119]: Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
Levels," BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

[#9P2000]: 9P2000 Protocol Specification, Plan 9 Manual Section 5
(http://man.cat-v.org/plan_9/5/).

[#mumble]: MUMBLE authentication scheme, Cloudozer LLP, 2012.

